." TOPIC: ddgst(1)
." AUTHOR: dd86k <dd@dax.moe>
."
." Please read man-pages(7) and groff_man(7) about the manual page format.
." If you're missing groff_man.7, install groff. Solid documentation.
."
.TH ddgst 1 "March 2024" dd86k "User manual"
.SH NAME
ddgst \- Hasher and file checker

.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY ddgst
.OP options...
.I files...|-
.YS

.SY ddgst
.OP options...
.B --check|--autocheck
.I list
.YS

.SY ddgst
.OP options...
.B --against=HASH
.I files...
.YS

.SY ddgst
.OP options...
.B --compare
.I files...
.YS

.SY ddgst
.OP options...
.B --args
.I text...
.YS

.SY ddgst
.OP options...
.B --benchmark
.YS

.SY ddgst
.B --version | --help | --license
.YS

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ddgst
is a file hasher and file checker. The main goal of this utility is to
centralize the various options into one package for multiple systems.

By default, the GNU-style checksums are used. You can use
.B --tag
to switch to the BSD-style checksums. This affects reading lists. There is also
.B --sri
for a Sub-Resource Integrity style hash. This is not supported in lists.

The
.B --check
and
.B --autocheck
option can be used to check a list of files with hashes.

The
.B --against
option is useful for checking a downloaded file against a digest you can
usually paste into your terminal emulator.

The
.B --compare
option is a fast way to compare two or more files.

.SH EXAMPLES

.TP
.B ddgst --hashes
List supported checksum and hash algorithms and exit.

.TP
.BI "ddgst --md5 " file
Hashes 
.I file
using MD5.

.TP
.BI "echo " test " | ddgst --sha1"
Use SHA-1 to read from the standard input file handle and digest a result.

.TP
.BI "ddgst --sha256 " src/*
Use SHA-256 to hash all files in the
.I src
folder.

.TP
.BI "ddgst --md5 -r " "*.{json,md}"
Use MD5 to hash all files in sub-directories recursively
.RI ( -r )
that end with .json or .md using the memory-mapped file option
.RI ( -m )
using the embedded glob matcher.

.TP
.BI "ddgst --sha256 -c " list
Use SHA-256 to verify the integrity a list of files. This is similar to
.BR sha256sum\ -c\ list .

.TP
.BI "ddgst --autocheck " list.sha1sum
Automatically detect and select hashing algorithm from file extension and use it
to process the list.

.SH ALIASES

You can check the list of supported hashes, checksums, and aliases using the
.B --hashes
argument.

.SH OPTIONS

ddgst uses command switches to select hashes and other related options.

.SS Entry methods

The default entry type are files. However, multiple types can be used at once.

.TP
.B --args
Hashes 
.I text
entries given as arguments, as UTF-8.

This is similar to using 
.B --stdin
and echoing text into it, but makes it more portable since different systems
may output different newlines formats.

.TP
.BI "-c " list ", --check=" list
Check and verify files in 
.B list
with their hashes.

.TP
.BI "-a " list ", --autocheck=" list
Check and verify files in 
.B list
with their hashes by automatically indentifying their hash and format.

.TP
.BI "--compare " "files..."
Compare all files to each other.

.TP
.BI "-A " hash ", --against=" hash
Compare all files to hash string.

.TP
.BI "-j " threads ", --parallel=" threads
Spawns specified amount of threads for hashing.

Only supported for the default mode.

.SS Traversing options

.TP
.B -r, --depth
Deepest directories first.

.TP
.B --breath
Sub directories first.

.TP
.B --nofollow
Do not follow symbolic links.

.SS Miscellaneous

.TP
.B --tag
Create or read BSD-style hashes.

.TP
.B --sri
Create SRI-style hashes.

.TP
.B -B, --buffersize
Set real buffer size for reading. The default is 1 MiB.

.SH ERRORS

.fi t \{\
.ft CW
\}
.TS
l	l.
Code	Description
_
1	CLI error
2	No hashes selected or autocheck not enabled
3	Internal error
4	Failed to set the hash key
5	Failed to set the hash seed
6	Missing entries
9	Could not hash text argument
10	List is empty
11	Unsupported style format
15	Two or more files are required to compare
.TE

.SH WARNINGS

The murmurhash3 hash may be in a different orientation on big-endian machines,
because this utility has only been tested on a x86-64 machine. If this is the
case, open up an issue on the GitHub repo.

.SH NOTES

Most UNIX-like shells use their own globbing mechanism. To use the embedded
globbing mechanism, use '*' or \\* explicitly. You can disable it with the --
switch.

Release versions of this utility has the druntime GC command-line
interface disabled.

HMAC is not supported.

.SH AUTHOR

Written by dd86k
.MT dd@dax.moe
.ME .

.UR https://github.com/dd86k/ddgst
Project homepage
.UE

.SH LICENSE

ddgst is currently licensed under the CC0-1.0 license, and so is this document.