." TOPIC: ddgst(1)
." AUTHOR: dd86k <dd@dax.moe>
."
." Please read man-pages(7) and groff_man(7) about the manual page format.
." If you're missing groff_man.7, install groff. Solid documentation.
."
.TH ddgst 1 "October 2022" dd86k "User manual"
.SH NAME
ddgst \- Generic hasher

.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY ddgst
.OP options...|--autocheck
.OP files...|--stdin
.YS

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ddgst
is a generic hasher. The main goal of this utility is to centralize
the various options into one package for multiple systems.

By default, the GNU-style checksums are used. You can use
.B --tag
to switch to the BSD-style checksums. This affects reading lists.

There is also
.B --sri
for a Sub-Resource Integrity style hash. This is not supported in lists.

The default entry mode is File for being the best case scenario for
behaving better on zero-length files, network shares, and on most
operating systems. The Mmfile option is good for performance reasons.

.SH EXAMPLES

.TP
.B ddgst --hashes
List supported checksum and hash algorithms and exit.

.TP
.BI "ddgst --md5 " file
Hashes 
.I file
using MD5.

.TP
.BI "echo " test " | ddgst --sha1"
Use SHA-1 to read from the standard input file handle and digest a result.

.TP
.BI "ddgst --sha256 " src/*
Use SHA-256 to hash all files in the
.I src
folder.

.TP
.BI "ddgst --md5 -m -r " "*.{json,md}"
Use MD5 to hash all files in sub-directories
.RI ( -r )
that end with .json or .md using the memory-mapped file option
.RI ( -m )
using the embedded glob matcher.

.TP
.BI "ddgst --sha256 -c " list
Use SHA-256 to verify the integrity a list of files. This is similar to
.BR sha256sum\ -c\ list .

.TP
.BI "ddgst --autocheck " list.sha1sum
Automatically detect and select hashing algorithm from file extension and use it
to process the list.

.SH ALIASES

Below is a list of supported checksum and hash algorithms.

.fi t \{\
.ft CW
\}
.TS
l	l2	l.
Alias	Name	Tag
_
crc32	CRC-32	CRC32
crc64iso	CRC-64-ISO	CRC64ISO
crc64ecma	CRC-64-ECMA	CRC64ECMA
murmur3a	MurmurHash3-32	MURMURHASH3-32
murmur3c	MurmurHash3-128/32	MURMURHASH3-128-32
murmur3f	MurmurHash3-128/64	MURMURHASH3-128-64
md5	MD5-128	MD5
ripemd160	RIPEMD-160	RIPEMD160
sha1	SHA-1-160	SHA1
sha224	SHA-2-224	SHA2-224
sha256	SHA-2-256	SHA2-256
sha384	SHA-2-384	SHA2-384
sha512	SHA-2-512	SHA2-512
sha3-224	SHA-3-224	SHA3-224
sha3-256	SHA-3-256	SHA3-256
sha3-384	SHA-3-384	SHA3-384
sha3-512	SHA-3-512	SHA3-512
shake128	SHAKE-128	SHAKE-128
shake256	SHAKE-256	SHAKE-256
blake2b512	BLAKE2b-512	BLAKE2B-512
blake2s256	BLAKE2s-256	BLAKE2S-256
.TE

.SH OPTIONS

ddgst uses command switches to select hashes and other related options.

.SS Entry methods

The default entry type are files. However, multiple types can be used at once.

.TP
.BI "-a " text ", --arg=" text
Hashes 
.I text
given as an argument (as UTF-8).

This is similar to using 
.B --stdin
and echoing text into it.

.TP
.BI "-c " list ", --check=" list
Check and verify files in 
.B list
with their hashes.

.TP
.BI "--compare " "files..."
Compare all files to each other.

.TP
.BI "-A " hash ", --against=" hash
Compare all files to hash string.

.TP
.B --stdin
Sets input to the standard input. If no file entries are given, this becomes
active.

.SS File input options

.TP
.B -f, --file
Set input mode to file (default).

.TP
.B -b, --binary
File: Set read mode to binary (default).

.TP
.B -t, --text
File: Set read mode to text.

.TP
.B -m, --mmfile
Set input mode to memory-mapped file.

.SS Globber engine

.TP
.B --shallow
Same-level directory (default).

.TP
.B -r, --depth
Deepest directories first.

.TP
-B --breath
Sub directories first.

.TP
.B --follow
Follow symbolic links (default).

.TP
.B --nofollow
Do not follow symbolic links.

.SS Miscellaneous

.TP
.B --tag
Create or read BSD-style hashes.

.TP
.B --sri
Create SRI-style hashes.

.TP
.B -B, --buffersize
Set real buffer size for file/mmfile/stdin (default=4K).

.SH ERRORS

.fi t \{\
.ft CW
\}
.TS
l	l.
Code	Description
_
1	CLI error
2	No hashes selected or autocheck not enabled
3	Internal error: Unable to initiate hash module with hash
4	Failed to set the hash key
5	Failed to set the hash seed
6	No such file
7	Could not determine hash type
9	Could not hash text argument
10	List is empty
11	Unsupported tag format in list due to missing filename
12	Internal error: Couldn't continue processing list
15	Two or more files are required to compare
.TE

.SH WARNINGS

The murmurhash3 hash may be in a different orientation on big-endian machines,
because this utility has only been tested on a x86-64 machine. If this is the
case, open up an issue on the GitHub repo.

.SH NOTES

Most UNIX-like shells use their own globbing mechanism. To use the embedded
globbing mechanism, use '*' or \\* explicitly. You can disable it with the --
switch.

Release versions of this utility has the druntime GC command-line
interface disabled.

HMAC is not supported.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by dd86k
.MT dd@dax.moe
.ME .

.SH LICENSE

ddgst is currently licensed under the CC0, and so is this document.